Updating the CRS coding tutorial (#271)
inbo/tutorials: content/tutorials/spatial_crs_coding/index.Rmd

### What?

A coordinate reference system (**CRS**) -- also called spatial reference system (SRS) -- is what you need if you want to interpret numeric coordinates as actual point locations with reference to the Earth.
Two types of coordinate reference system exist: _geodetic_ and _projected_ CRSs.
The former serve only to locate coordinates relative to a 3D model of the Earth surface, while the latter add a projection to generate coordinates on a 2D map.

> Coordinate operations convert or transform coordinates from one CRS to another, and you often need them because the CRS may differ between dataset 1, dataset 2 or a specific mapping technology.

Reviewer: maybe add the example of leaflet, which wants the coordinates to be in epsg 4326 format

Author: OK!

Author: 5e5ba2f3

It is good to know this, but you _can_ skip this section if you like.

The reason for writing this tutorial are the recent (and ongoing) changes in several important geospatial libraries, especially **GDAL** and **PROJ**.
They are used by most geospatial tools, including the key geospatial R packages `rgdal`, `sp`, `sf`, `stars`, `terra` and `raster`.

Since long, coordinate reference systems in R (and many other tools) have been represented by so called 'PROJ.4 strings' (or 'proj4strings'), referring to the long-standing version 4 of the PROJ library.
But, we will not use them here!
It is discouraged to use 'PROJ strings'[^projstring] any longer to represent a CRS; several string elements for CRSs are now deprecated or unsupported.
Currently, PROJ (<https://proj.org>) regards PROJ strings only as a means of specifying a _coordinate operation_ (conversions or transformations _between_ CRSs).
Performing coordinate operations is the main aim of PROJ.

[^projstring]: 'PROJ string' is the term used in current PROJ documentation.
Here, we only use 'PROJ.4 string' (or 'proj4string') when referring specifically to the PROJ string appearance in version 4 of the PROJ software.

> 

Reviewer: Maybe delete these lines (repetition of line 59)?

Author: This is in the footnote of the word 'PROJ string', explaining more explicitly why one time we speak about PROJ string and another time about PROJ.4 string. So I'd rather keep it, otherwise it must be guessed.

Let's just have **one last nostalgic peek** (and then, no more!!) to the proj4string for EPSG:31370, the Belgian Lambert 72 CRS [^belge72]:

    +proj=lcc +lat_1=51.16666723333333 +lat_2=49.8333339 +lat_0=90 +lon_0=4.367486666666666 +x_0=150000.013 +y_0=5400088.438 +ellps=intl +towgs84=-106.8686,52.2978,-103.7239,0.3366,-0.457,1.8422,-1.2747 +units=m +no_defs

[^belge72]: Note that the _currently returned_ PROJ string for EPSG:31370, if requested from PROJ ≥ 6 or GDAL 3 (not shown), lacks the datum reference which, in PROJ.4, was defined indirectly by `+towgs84` with the 7-parameter (Helmert) transformation to the WGS84 datum.
Hence the current PROJ string is a deficient representation of EPSG:31370.

> Several reasons have led to recent changes in GDAL and PROJ, such as the use of WGS84 as a transformation hub while it is a dynamic CRS, higher accuracy requirements in transformations and the availability of better CRS specification standards than PROJ strings.

Reviewer: Several difficult terms here: 'transformation hub' and 'dynamic CRS' will not be clear for most readers.

Reviewer: Do these terms relate to the 'ensemble datum' which you explained in a footnote?

Author: I'll try to make that a bit more clear (or add a reference), but I feel a bit obliged here to not explain in full - it would need much more text while it is just background information.

Author: 8a336571

The changes are included in **GDAL 3** and **PROJ ≥ 6**, which many R packages now support and promote.

In consequence, support for PROJ strings to represent a CRS is reduced and discouraged.
It _can_ still be done, preferrably adding the `+type=crs` element to distinguish such a string from modern PROJ strings.
The latter represent a coordinate operation, not a CRS.
Currently, support for most geodetic datums is already lacking in PROJ strings [^projcrs] (unless one defines it indirectly, but likely less accurately, with the now deprecated `+towgs84` key).

> The WGS84 ensemble datum [^wgs84] (EPSG:6326) is now by default assumed for a CRS declared with a PROJ string.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The WGS84 ensemble datum [^wgs84] (EPSG:4326) is now by default assumed for a CRS declared with a PROJ string.
```

Author: The geodetic datum is [EPSG:6326](https://epsg.org/datum_6326/World-Geodetic-System-1984-ensemble.html). A 2D geographic CRS that uses this datum is [EPSG:4326](https://epsg.org/crs_4326/WGS-84.html), but there are others.

Reviewer: Strange, I also looked this up, but google directed me to: [https://epsg.io/6326](https://epsg.io/6326) which apparently is not the same as the link you give (and which convinced me you made a typo). Confuses me 🤔

Author: Interesting and well seen @hansvancalster, thank you! The correct link at esg.io is https://epsg.io/6326-datum. It appears that the `AUTHORITY:CODE` implementation is software specific (in PROJ, it is limited to CRSs), and not a standard at all. The numeric EPSG codes can overlap between object types (such as a transformation and a datum, in this case).

```
$ projinfo EPSG:6326
input string: parsing of user string failed: crs not found
```

The best way to refer an EPSG object appears to be using a Uniform Resource Name (URN) - see https://docs.opengeospatial.org/pol/09-048r5.html.

```
$ projinfo urn:ogc:def:datum:EPSG::6326
WKT2:2019 string:
DATUM["World Geodetic System 1984",
    ELLIPSOID["WGS 84",6378137,298.257223563,
        LENGTHUNIT["metre",1]],
    ID["EPSG",6326]]
```

For clarity I'll replace with '[datum:EPSG::6326](https://epsg.org/datum_6326/World-Geodetic-System-1984-ensemble.html)' in the tutorial.

Author: Applied in 5de4e91e

- **DO:**

  **The _general principle_ that we recommend is: specify the CRS by using the _EPSG code_, but do so _without_ using a PROJ string.**
  
  _Note: in case you wish to define a custom CRS yourself, ideally use WKT2 or its more convenient [PROJJSON](https://proj.org/specifications/projjson.html) counterpart._

- **DON'T:**

>   **It's not longer advised to use PROJ strings to specify a CRS, such as `+init=epsg:????`, `+proj=longlat`, ... (even though that _might_ still work, their usage is discouraged).**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  **It's no longer advised to use PROJ strings to specify a CRS, such as `+init=epsg:????`, `+proj=longlat`, ... (even though that _might_ still work, their usage is discouraged).**
```

> In the below code chunks, specifying a CRS from the EPSG database is demonstrated for several important geospatial R packages: **`sf`**, **`sp`** and **`raster`**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the below code chunks, specifying a CRS with the aid of an EPSG code is demonstrated for several important geospatial R packages: **`sf`**, **`sp`** and **`raster`**.
```

Author: I wanted to make clear that the code is limited to CRSs that are available in the EPSG database. As opposed to other (custom) CRSs. I'll rephrase.

Author: de3dd4c6

This happens even while you did not enter a PROJ string.
Note that the derived PROJ string will not be used further if you're on GDAL 3 / PROJ ≥ 6, and a WKT2 string will be generated as well for actual use.
In the presence of GDAL 3 / PROJ ≥ 6 and when using `sp` or `raster`, you will (at the time of writing) get a **warning** from `rgdal` about dropped keys in the generated PROJ strings [^warnings].
You can safely ignore this warning on condition that you didn't define the CRS with a PROJ string.
Also, you can suppress the warning with `options(rgdal_show_exportToProj4_warnings = "none")` in the beginning of your script (before loading `rgdal` or dependent packages).

[^warnings]: The packages give a warning especially to make developers of _other_, dependent packages _aware_ that they should also make sure their functions do not _require_ PROJ strings or use hardcoded PROJ strings.
Instead, they should defer the handling of CRS representation to the basic geospatial R packages (i.e. dependent on the version of PROJ/GDAL).
So, the appearance of these warnings marks a period of transition in order to let other packages become GDAL 3 and PROJ ≥ 6 compliant.

> And the good news is that most popular geospatial packages _have_ become GDAL 3 and PROJ ≥ 6 compliant!

Reviewer: Not sure if you have provided a code snippet in the tutorial to see which versions of GDAL or PROJ are active. Loading the `sf` package will print a message with this information if I remember well.

Author: > Not sure if you have provided a code snippet in the tutorial to see which versions of GDAL or PROJ are active.

Yes, it's included, both for `sf` and `gdal`.
